# The Artisan Bakery Production Manual: Processes and Scheduling for Small-Scale Operations

## Section 1: Foundations of Commercial Bread Production

The transition from artisanal home baking to a commercially viable
bakery operation hinges on a fundamental shift in mindset and
methodology. While passion for the craft remains the core ingredient, it
must be supported by a rigorous framework of precision, consistency, and
scientific understanding. This section establishes the non-negotiable
principles that govern a professional bakery. It moves beyond individual
recipes to instill the language and systems of a commercial baker,
focusing on the tools that enable predictability, scalability, and
quality control in a dynamic production environment. Mastery of these
foundational concepts---baker\'s percentages, hydration management, and
the stages of dough development---is the prerequisite for producing a
diverse range of high-quality breads efficiently and profitably.

### 1.1 The Professional Baker\'s Language: Baker\'s Percentages and Scaling

In any professional kitchen, and especially in a bakery, a common
language is essential for precision, consistency, and effective
communication. The universal standard in the baking industry is
**Baker\'s Percentage**, also known as baker\'s math.^1^ This system is
the bedrock of all professional formula development, scaling, and daily
production. In baker\'s percentage, the total weight of flour in a
formula is always expressed as 100%, regardless of how many types of
flour are used. Every other ingredient---water, salt, yeast, starter,
and enrichments---is then expressed as a percentage of that total flour
weight.^1^

The primary reason for this system\'s universal adoption is its power to
facilitate accurate and effortless scaling. Whether a baker needs to
produce a single test loaf or a batch of one hundred, the formula\'s
ratios remain constant, eliminating the guesswork and potential for
error inherent in volumetric measurements or recipes tied to fixed
yields.^1^

Calculation Mechanics

The calculation of baker\'s percentages is straightforward. To determine
the percentage of any given ingredient, its weight is divided by the
total weight of the flour, and the result is multiplied by 100.3

The formula is:

\$\$(\\frac{\\text{Weight of Ingredient}}{\\text{Total Weight of
Flour}}) \\times 100 = \\text{Baker\'s Percentage of Ingredient}\$\$

For example, in a simple dough with 1000g of flour and 700g of water:

\$\$(\\frac{700\\text{g Water}}{1000\\text{g Flour}}) \\times 100 =
70\\% \\text{ Hydration}\$\$

A common point of confusion for those new to the system is that the sum
of all percentages will invariably exceed 100%.^2^ This is by design.
The system is not meant to show each ingredient\'s proportion of the
total dough mass, but rather its specific relationship to the flour,
which is the structural constant in every bread formula.^4^

To scale a formula for a desired batch size, the process is reversed.
First, the required total flour weight is determined. Then, each
ingredient\'s weight is calculated by converting its percentage to a
decimal and multiplying it by the new flour weight.^2^

The formula for scaling is:

\$\$(\\frac{\\text{Baker\'s Percentage of Ingredient}}{100}) \\times
\\text{New Total Flour Weight} = \\text{New Ingredient Weight}\$\$

For instance, to scale the previous formula to use 25kg (25,000g) of
flour:

\$\$(70\\% / 100) \\times 25,000\\text{g Flour} = 0.70 \\times
25,000\\text{g} = 17,500\\text{g Water}\$\$

Advanced Application: True Hydration and Preferments

The utility of baker\'s percentage extends to more complex formulas
involving preferments like a poolish, biga, or a sourdough levain. A
simple calculation that treats the preferment as a single ingredient can
be misleading, masking the dough\'s true characteristics.1 For example,
a formula might list water at 48% and a poolish at 50%, suggesting a
very stiff dough. However, since a poolish is composed of equal parts
flour and water, it contributes significantly to the final dough\'s
total flour and water content.1

To gain an accurate understanding of the dough, a professional baker
calculates the **Overall Baker\'s Percent**. This involves
deconstructing the preferment into its constituent flour and water
amounts and adding them to the flour and water from the final mix. The
percentages are then recalculated based on these new totals.^1^ This
step is critical for determining the *true hydration* of the dough,
which is a key predictor of its behavior. A sourdough levain, which
contains both flour and water, must also be accounted for in this way to
understand the final dough\'s properties accurately.^7^

A baker\'s percentage formula is far more than a mere recipe; it is a
coded blueprint of the dough\'s identity and its predicted behavior
during production. A seasoned professional reads these percentages as a
diagnostic tool to assess a formula\'s characteristics before a single
ingredient is scaled. This ability to interpret the numbers allows for
immediate insight into handling requirements, fermentation timing, and
final product attributes. For example, a formula showing 85% hydration
immediately signals a very wet, slack dough that will be sticky and
require gentle handling techniques, such as stretch-and-folds, rather
than intensive kneading.^8^ A starter percentage of 10% suggests a long,
slow bulk fermentation of 6-12 hours, whereas a 20% starter indicates a
much faster fermentation of 3-6 hours.^3^ A salt percentage of 2% is
standard for flavor and gluten tightening, while 3% might be used for a
pizza dough to control fermentation and add flavor.^3^ By simply looking
at a set of percentages, the baker can anticipate the entire production
process, enabling rapid troubleshooting, consistent quality control, and
efficient new product development. This predictive capacity is a
fundamental skill that distinguishes professional bakery operations from
home baking.

### 1.2 The Spectrum of Hydration: Managing Wet and Stiff Doughs

Within the framework of baker\'s percentage, the single most influential
variable is hydration---the ratio of water (or other liquids) to flour
by weight.^8^ This percentage dictates the dough\'s consistency (its
viscosity and stickiness), the techniques required to handle it, the
speed of fermentation, and the ultimate structure of the finished
crumb.^10^ A small bakery producing a diverse menu must achieve mastery
over the full spectrum of hydration, as the workflows for low- and
high-hydration doughs are fundamentally different.

Low-Hydration Doughs (approx. 57-65%)

Doughs in this range are characterized as stiff and dense. They are
significantly less sticky and easier to handle and shape once the
initial mixing is complete.10 However, achieving full hydration of the
flour and developing an adequate gluten network requires more energy and
time. These doughs typically demand more intensive mechanical mixing in
a spiral mixer to build the necessary strength and elasticity.11
Fermentation can proceed more slowly, as the dense structure restricts
yeast and enzymatic activity.10 Their inherent stiffness allows them to
hold their shape exceptionally well, making them ideal for products that
require a tight, uniform crumb, such as pan-baked sandwich loaves.10

High-Hydration Doughs (approx. 75-90%+)

High-hydration doughs are the hallmark of many artisan breads, known for
producing a beautifully open, irregular, and airy crumb with a thin,
crisp crust.10 These doughs are slack, highly extensible, and
notoriously sticky, presenting a significant handling challenge.8
Traditional kneading is often ineffective and can damage the fragile
gluten structure.10 Instead, their workflow relies on alternative
techniques. An autolyse (a rest period with just flour and water) is
often employed to encourage full flour hydration and initiate gluten
development without mechanical stress.12 Strength is built through a
series of gentle \"stretch and fold\" or \"coil fold\" maneuvers during
bulk fermentation.12 To manage the stickiness, bakers handle the dough
with wet or oiled hands and use dough scrapers on lightly oiled
surfaces.14 Fermentation in these doughs is typically more rapid due to
the increased water content, which facilitates greater yeast and enzyme
mobility.10 Breads like Ciabatta and Focaccia are classic examples of
high-hydration doughs.12

The hydration levels of the day\'s scheduled products are not just a
formulation detail; they are a primary driver of operational planning,
directly influencing the utilization of equipment, space, and labor. A
production day heavy with low-hydration sandwich loaves will see the
bakery\'s spiral mixer---designed for powerful, intensive kneading---in
continuous operation.^16^ Conversely, a day focused on high-hydration
ciabatta and focaccia will necessitate a different workflow. The mixing
might be done in a planetary mixer or directly in large dough tubs to
facilitate in-bowl folding.^12^ This shift in process requires ample
floor or shelf space to accommodate multiple large fermentation bins.
Furthermore, the gentle dividing and shaping of these delicate doughs
demand significant, clear bench space, and the handling techniques are
more nuanced, requiring specific staff training. The physical layout and
capital equipment of a bakery must therefore be planned with this
operational dichotomy in mind. The ability to run these fundamentally
different workflows, often in parallel, is a key logistical challenge
for a small bakery aiming for a diverse product line.

### 1.3 The Core Stages of Dough Development & Fermentation

Regardless of the specific bread type, all doughs progress through a
series of critical stages. Understanding the purpose of each stage
allows the baker to control the process and achieve consistent results.

- **Autolyse:** An autolyse is a rest period after the initial, gentle
  mixing of only the flour and water in a formula.^18^ During this time,
  which can range from 20 minutes to several hours, several important
  processes occur without any mechanical input. The flour becomes fully
  hydrated, which is especially beneficial for whole-grain flours, as it
  softens the sharp edges of the bran, preventing them from severing the
  developing gluten network.^19^ Enzymes present in the flour begin to
  break down starches into simpler sugars, making them more available
  for the yeast later. Most importantly, gluten-forming proteins
  (gliadin and glutenin) begin to bond, forming a preliminary gluten
  structure. This reduces the total mixing time required, which in turn
  minimizes dough oxidation and preserves the flour\'s natural
  flavor.^19^ For very long autolyse periods (over three hours), the
  mixture should be refrigerated to prevent unwanted fermentation and
  enzymatic degradation.^21^

- **Mixing and Desired Dough Temperature (DDT):** The primary goal of
  the mixing stage is not merely to combine ingredients, but to develop
  the gluten network to its optimal state and, critically, to achieve
  the **Desired Dough Temperature (DDT)**.^22^ The DDT, typically
  between 75°F and 78°F (24°C and 26°C) for many artisan breads, is a
  crucial control point because temperature is the primary regulator of
  fermentation speed.^23^ A warmer dough will ferment much faster than a
  cooler one. Professional bakers meticulously control DDT by adjusting
  the temperature of the water used in the mix. They calculate the
  required water temperature using a formula that accounts for the room
  temperature, the flour temperature, and the frictional heat generated
  by the specific mixer being used.^22^

- **Bulk Fermentation (First Rise):** This is the period of fermentation
  that occurs after mixing is complete and before the dough is divided
  and shaped.^25^ It is during this stage that the dough develops the
  majority of its flavor, strength, and structure. The yeast and
  bacteria metabolize the sugars in the flour, producing carbon dioxide
  (which leavens the dough) and organic acids (which contribute to
  flavor). For many artisan doughs, this stage includes a series of
  \"folds\" (either stretch-and-folds or coil folds) at regular
  intervals, which serve to build gluten strength, equalize the dough\'s
  temperature, and gently redistribute gases and nutrients.^26^ The
  duration of bulk fermentation is not determined by a clock, but by the
  state of the dough, which is a function of its temperature and the
  amount of leavening used.^25^ Bakers rely on visual and tactile cues:
  a perceptible increase in volume (often between 50% and 100%), a
  smooth, domed surface, and the appearance of bubbles on the surface
  and sides of the fermentation container.^25^

- **Dividing, Preshaping, and Bench Rest:** Once bulk fermentation is
  complete, the large mass of dough is tipped out onto the work surface
  and divided into pieces of the correct weight for the final
  loaves.^28^ Because this process disrupts the gluten structure, each
  piece is then given a \"preshape.\" This involves gently forming the
  dough into a loose round or cylinder.^28^ Preshaping creates a more
  uniform piece of dough, builds a small amount of tension, and makes
  the final shaping step easier and more consistent.^28^ Following the
  preshape, the dough pieces are allowed a \"bench rest\" of 15 to 30
  minutes, covered to prevent a skin from forming.^29^ This rest period
  allows the gluten, which was tightened during preshaping, to relax,
  making the dough extensible enough for the final, more intensive
  shaping without tearing.^28^

## Section 2: Production Formulas and Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs)

This section provides the detailed, actionable plans for each of the
five core products. Each subsection is a self-contained Standard
Operating Procedure (SOP), designed to be used directly on the bakery
floor for training and daily production. The formulas are presented in
baker\'s percentages to ensure scalability and consistency. The
procedures outlined are based on established professional practices
designed to maximize quality and operational efficiency in a small-scale
commercial setting.

### Table 2.1: Master Formula Quick Reference

This table offers an at-a-glance comparison of the fundamental
architecture of each bread type. It serves as a daily dashboard for
production planning, allowing a baker to quickly grasp the key
differences in hydration, leavening, and enrichment, which in turn
dictate handling techniques and scheduling.

  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Ingredient**   **Sourdough**   **Baguette       **Whole        **Ciabatta     **Focaccia**
                                   (Poolish)**      Wheat**        (Biga)**       
  ---------------- --------------- ---------------- -------------- -------------- --------------
  Bread Flour      \$85-90\\%\$    \$100\\%\$ (in   \$50\\%\$      \$100\\%\$ (in \$100\\%\$
                                   final dough)                    final dough)   

  Whole Wheat      \$10-15\\%\$    \-               \$50\\%\$      \-             \-
  Flour                                                                           

  Water            \$73-78\\%\$    \$68-75\\%\$     \$70-75\\%\$   \$80-90\\%\$   \$80-90\\%\$

  Sourdough        \$20-25\\%\$    \-               \-             \-             \$16\\%\$
  Starter                                                                         (optional)

  Yeast (IDY)      \-              \$0.3-1.0\\%\$   \$1.1\\%\$     \$2\\%\$       \$1-1.5\\%\$

  Salt             \$2\\%\$        \$2\\%\$         \$2\\%\$       \$2\\%\$       \$2-3\\%\$

  Olive Oil        \-              \-               \-             \$8-10\\%\$    \$3-10\\%\$

  Sweetener        \-              \$0.5\\%\$       \$15\\%\$      \-             \$4-7\\%\$
                                   (Malt)           (Brown Sugar)                 (Honey)

  Enrichment       \-              \-               \$14\\%\$      \-             \-
                                                    (Butter)                      

  *Preferment*     *Levain*        *Poolish*        *-*            *Biga*         *-*
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Note: Percentages are based on a synthesis of typical commercial
formulas.^7^ Adjustments may be necessary based on specific flour
properties and environmental conditions.

### 2.1 Classic Sourdough (Country Loaf)

This naturally leavened loaf is a cornerstone of any artisan bakery,
prized for its complex flavor, open crumb, and crisp, chewy crust. Its
production cycle is long but allows for significant scheduling
flexibility through cold fermentation.

- **Standard Formula:** 85% Bread Flour, 15% Whole Wheat Flour, 73%
  Water (true hydration), 20-25% Levain (100% hydration starter), 2%
  Salt.^3^

- **Mixing & Fermentation:**

  1.  **Levain Build:** Approximately 4-12 hours prior to mixing the
      final dough, build the levain by feeding a portion of the mother
      starter with flour and water. The levain is ready when it is
      bubbly, aromatic, and has at least doubled in volume.^26^

  2.  **Autolyse/Fermentolyse:** In a large mixing tub, combine the
      flours, water, and ripe levain. Mix until no dry flour remains.
      Cover and let rest for 30-60 minutes. This step, which includes
      the starter, is technically a \"fermentolyse\" and kickstarts the
      fermentation process.^21^

  3.  **Final Mix:** Add the salt and any remaining water to the dough.
      Use wet hands to pinch and fold the dough in the tub until the
      salt is fully incorporated.

  4.  **Bulk Fermentation:** The target duration is 3-6 hours at a
      Desired Dough Temperature (DDT) of 76-78°F (24-26°C).^22^ During
      the first 2 hours of this period, perform 4-6 sets of
      stretch-and-folds, spaced 30 minutes apart, to build strength and
      structure.^26^ Bulk fermentation is complete when the dough has
      increased in volume by 50-100%, feels airy and full of life, and
      shows a slightly domed surface with visible bubbles.^25^

- **Shaping:**

  1.  **Preshaping:** Gently turn the dough out onto a lightly floured
      surface. Divide the dough into the desired loaf weights. Preshape
      each piece into a tight round (boule) or a cylinder (for an oval
      bâtard).^28^ Cover and let rest for 20-30 minutes.

  2.  **Final Shaping:** After the bench rest, perform the final shape.
      The goal is to create a taut outer skin or \"membrane\" that will
      trap gases during the final proof and oven spring. For a boule,
      this involves a series of folds and then dragging the dough on the
      work surface to create tension.^22^

- **Proofing:**

  1.  Place the shaped loaf seam-side up into a well-floured proofing
      basket (banneton).^22^

  2.  **Cold Retardation:** For optimal flavor development and critical
      operational flexibility, immediately cover the banneton and place
      it in a refrigerator set to approximately 40°F (4°C). The dough
      will cold proof (retard) for 12-24 hours, or even up to 48
      hours.^34^ This decouples the mixing and baking schedules,
      allowing loaves to be baked directly from the refrigerator as
      needed.

- **Baking & Cooling:** Refer to Section 3 for detailed oven protocols.

### 2.2 Traditional Baguette (Poolish Method)

The baguette is a test of a baker\'s skill, demanding precise handling
to achieve its characteristic thin, crisp crust, open crumb, and
delicate flavor. The use of a poolish (a wet preferment) is a classic
technique to develop flavor and extensibility.

- **Standard Formula:** 100% Bread Flour, 68-75% Water, 0.3-1.0% Instant
  Dry Yeast (IDY), 2% Salt. A significant portion of the total flour and
  an equal weight of water (e.g., 30-50% of the flour) are used to
  create a **Poolish**.^30^ The lower yeast percentage is used for
  longer fermentation times.

- **Mixing & Fermentation:**

  1.  **Poolish Preparation (Day 1):** Mix equal weights of flour and
      water with a very small amount of yeast (e.g., 0.1% of the poolish
      flour weight). Cover and let this preferment ferment at a cool
      room temperature (or in a retarder) for 12-16 hours. It is ready
      when it is bubbly, domed, and has a nutty aroma.^39^

  2.  **Final Dough Mix (Day 2):** In a spiral mixer, combine the ripe
      poolish with the remaining flour, water, yeast, and salt. Mix on
      low speed to incorporate, then on a higher speed for 8-12 minutes
      until the dough is smooth, elastic, and achieves full gluten
      development.^30^

  3.  **Bulk Fermentation:** This stage is relatively short, typically
      1.5-2 hours at room temperature. The dough should receive 2-3
      folds during this time to build strength.^40^

- **Shaping:**

  1.  **Divide and Preshape:** Divide the dough into 250-300g
      pieces.^29^ Gently degas and preshape each piece into a loose
      cylinder. Cover and allow a 15-20 minute bench rest.^29^

  2.  **Final Shaping:** The final shape requires a delicate touch to
      elongate the dough without expelling the gas. Place the preshaped
      cylinder seam-side up. Perform a letter fold, pressing to seal.
      Fold the dough in half lengthwise and seal the seam firmly with
      the heel of the hand. Gently roll the cylinder from the center
      outwards, applying even pressure to achieve the desired length and
      tapered ends.^29^

- **Proofing:**

  1.  Place the shaped baguettes seam-side up on a heavily floured
      baker\'s linen, known as a **couche**. The couche is pleated
      between each baguette to provide side support and prevent them
      from flattening into each other.^40^

  2.  The final proof is short, typically 30-60 minutes at room
      temperature.^39^ The baguettes are ready when they are puffy and a
      gentle poke leaves an indentation that slowly springs back.
      Baguettes are typically baked on the same day they are mixed. A
      long cold retard of the final shape can result in a thicker, less
      delicate crust, which is generally undesirable.^42^

- **Baking & Cooling:** Refer to Section 3. Requires very high initial
  heat and substantial steam.

### 2.3 Whole Wheat Sandwich Loaf

This enriched loaf is designed for softness, a tight and uniform crumb
suitable for slicing, and a rich flavor profile from the whole grains,
butter, and sweetener. Its production process relies on mechanical
mixing and is contained within a loaf pan.

- **Standard Formula:** 50% Whole Wheat Flour, 50% Bread Flour, \~70%
  Hydration (from milk or water), 1.1% Instant Dry Yeast, 2% Salt, 14%
  Unsalted Butter (softened), 15% Brown Sugar.^31^

- **Mixing & Fermentation:**

  1.  **Autolyse:** Combining the flours and liquid for an extended rest
      of 30 minutes to 2.5 hours is highly recommended. This step is
      crucial for softening the bran in the whole wheat flour, which
      allows for better gluten development and results in a softer,
      lighter loaf.^20^

  2.  **Final Mix:** Add the remaining ingredients (yeast, salt, sugar,
      softened butter) to the autolysed mixture. This dough requires
      significant mechanical mixing in a stand or spiral mixer for 7-10
      minutes to develop a strong, elastic gluten network capable of
      supporting the heavy bran particles and fat content.^31^ The final
      dough should be smooth and pull away from the sides of the bowl.

  3.  **Bulk Fermentation:** Place the dough in a lightly oiled
      container, cover, and let it rise in a warm environment (75-80°F
      or 24-27°C) for 60-90 minutes, or until it has doubled in
      size.^31^

- **Shaping:**

  1.  Gently turn the dough out onto a lightly floured surface and press
      it into a rectangle, degassing it in the process.

  2.  Roll the rectangle up tightly into a log, ensuring the length
      matches that of the loaf pan (typically a 9x5 inch pan). Pinch the
      seam and the ends to seal.^31^

  3.  Place the shaped log seam-side down into a greased loaf pan.

- **Proofing:**

  1.  Cover the loaf pan loosely and let the dough proof in a warm,
      draft-free spot for another 60-90 minutes.

  2.  The loaf is ready to bake when the dough has risen to form a dome
      that is approximately 1 to 1.5 inches above the rim of the
      pan.^31^

- **Baking & Cooling:** Refer to Section 3. This bread is baked at a
  more moderate temperature (e.g., 350°F or 177°C) compared to hearth
  breads, and does not require steam.

### 2.4 High-Hydration Ciabatta

Ciabatta, Italian for \"slipper,\" is defined by its extremely open,
porous crumb and thin, crisp crust. Achieving this structure requires a
very high-hydration dough and extremely gentle handling. A preferment,
such as a stiff biga, is often used to build flavor and strength.

- **Standard Formula:** 100% Bread Flour, 80-90% Water, 2% Instant Dry
  Yeast, 2% Salt, 8% Olive Oil.^32^ High-protein bread flour (12.5%+) is
  recommended to absorb the high amount of water.^45^

- **Mixing & Fermentation:**

  1.  **Biga Preparation (Day 1):** Mix a portion of the flour, a
      smaller portion of the water, and a pinch of yeast to form a stiff
      dough. Cover and let this ferment at a cool room temperature or in
      the refrigerator overnight to develop flavor.^46^

  2.  **Final Dough Mix (Day 2):** In a mixer, combine the ripe biga
      with the remaining flour, salt, yeast, and most of the water. Mix
      until a cohesive dough forms. Then, using a technique called
      **bassinage** or \"double hydration,\" slowly stream in the
      remaining water and olive oil while the mixer is running on low
      speed. This allows the gluten to develop before being
      \"super-hydrated,\" resulting in a stronger final dough.^24^

  3.  **Bulk Fermentation:** Transfer the extremely wet dough to a
      well-oiled rectangular container. Let it ferment for 2-3 hours.
      During this time, perform 3-4 sets of gentle stretch-and-folds at
      30-45 minute intervals. The folds should be performed with
      well-oiled or wet hands to build strength without degassing the
      dough.^46^ The dough will become billowy and full of large
      bubbles.

- **Shaping:**

  1.  Ciabatta is not \"shaped\" in a traditional sense; it is
      \"coaxed\" into form.^32^ Generously flour the work surface.

  2.  Gently tip the fermented dough out of its container onto the
      flour, trying to maintain its rectangular shape and preserving as
      much gas as possible. Lightly flour the top surface of the dough.

  3.  Using a floured bench scraper, cut the dough into rectangular or
      slipper-shaped portions. Handle the dough as little as possible to
      protect its delicate, open structure.^46^

- **Proofing:**

  1.  Carefully transfer the cut pieces to a heavily floured couche or
      parchment-lined baking sheet.

  2.  The final proof is short, typically 30-60 minutes at room
      temperature, just long enough for the dough to become slightly
      puffy.^46^ A poke test should show the indentation springing back
      very slowly.

- **Baking & Cooling:** Refer to Section 3. Requires high heat and
  steam.

### 2.5 Artisan Focaccia

Focaccia is a versatile and popular flatbread, characterized by its
dimpled surface, rich olive oil flavor, and chewy, open crumb. Its high
hydration and simple shaping process make it well-suited for a small
bakery\'s workflow, especially when using long, cold fermentation for
scheduling flexibility.

- **Standard Formula:** 100% Bread Flour, 80-90% Water, 1-1.5% Instant
  Dry Yeast, 2% Salt, 3-4% Olive Oil (in the dough). Additional olive
  oil is used liberally to coat the pan and the top of the dough.^33^

- **Mixing & Fermentation:**

  1.  **Mixing:** A no-knead approach is highly effective. In a large
      bowl or tub, combine all the dough ingredients (flour, water,
      yeast, salt, olive oil) and mix until a shaggy, cohesive mass is
      formed with no dry spots.^33^

  2.  **Bulk Fermentation:** The bakery has two primary options for this
      stage:

      - **Same-Day Method:** Ferment the dough at room temperature for
        2-3 hours, performing several sets of stretch-and-folds every
        30-45 minutes to build strength.^52^

      - **Cold Fermentation (Recommended):** For superior flavor and
        significant scheduling advantages, cover the mixed dough and
        place it directly into the refrigerator for a long, cold
        fermentation of 12 to 72 hours. This method develops a more
        complex flavor profile and allows the dough to be prepared days
        in advance.^51^

- **Shaping:**

  1.  \"Shaping\" focaccia consists of preparing it for its final proof
      in the baking pan. Generously coat a sheet pan (e.g., a 9x13 inch
      or half-sheet pan) with olive oil.

  2.  Transfer the bulk-fermented dough (either from the counter or
      directly from the refrigerator) into the oiled pan.

  3.  With oiled hands, gently press and stretch the dough towards the
      edges of the pan. If the dough resists and springs back, cover it
      and let it rest for 20-30 minutes to allow the gluten to relax,
      then continue stretching. Repeat as necessary until the dough
      evenly covers the pan\'s surface.^52^

- **Proofing:**

  1.  The final proof occurs in the baking pan. Cover the pan and let
      the dough proof at room temperature until it is visibly puffy,
      airy, and has risen significantly. This can take 1.5 to 4 hours,
      depending on the dough temperature and ambient conditions.^52^

  2.  **Dimpling and Topping:** Just before baking, drizzle the surface
      of the proofed dough generously with more olive oil. With oiled
      fingertips, press firmly down through the dough to the bottom of
      the pan, creating the characteristic dimples. This helps to
      redistribute the gas and prevents the formation of massive,
      undesirable bubbles during baking. Sprinkle with flaky sea salt
      and other desired toppings (e.g., rosemary, olives).^52^

- **Baking & Cooling:** Refer to Section 3. Baked at a high temperature;
  steam is not typically required but can be used.

## Section 3: Oven Management and Post-Bake Protocol

The final stages of production---baking and cooling---are as critical to
the quality of the final product as mixing and fermentation. This is
where the dough\'s potential is fully realized. Proper oven management
transforms the developed dough into a loaf with the desired volume,
crust, and crumb, while a patient and methodical cooling process ensures
that structure and texture are preserved. These final steps require
discipline and an understanding of the physical and chemical
transformations occurring within the bread.

### 3.1 Mastering the Bake: Temperature and Steam

The oven is the heart of the bakery, and its correct operation is
paramount. For hearth-style artisan breads such as Sourdough, Baguettes,
and Ciabatta, the baking process is defined by two key elements: intense
initial heat and abundant steam.

- **The Role of High Heat:** These breads require a deck oven preheated
  to a very high temperature, typically in the range of 475-525°F
  (245-275°C).^39^ When the relatively cool dough is loaded into this
  hot environment, the rapid temperature change causes a dramatic
  expansion of the gases trapped within the dough. This phenomenon,
  known as \"oven spring,\" is responsible for the loaf\'s final volume
  and the dramatic opening of the scores.^41^ An underheated oven will
  fail to produce adequate oven spring, resulting in a dense, squat
  loaf.

- **The Critical Role of Steam:** Steam injection during the first 10-20
  minutes of baking is a non-negotiable requirement for producing a
  superior artisan crust.^39^ The steam-saturated oven environment
  serves a crucial purpose: it keeps the surface of the dough moist and
  elastic. This delays the formation of a hard crust, allowing the loaf
  to expand to its maximum potential during the oven spring phase.^57^
  Without steam, the crust sets prematurely, acting like a straitjacket
  that constrains the loaf\'s expansion, leading to a dense crumb, a
  dull, thick crust, and poor score opening.

- **Steam Generation and Venting:** Commercial deck ovens are equipped
  with built-in steam injection systems. A typical professional baking
  cycle involves loading the bread, immediately injecting a specific
  amount of steam (e.g., a short pulse followed by a longer one), and
  then baking with the oven vents closed to trap the moisture.^56^ After
  the period of oven spring is complete (approximately 15-20 minutes),
  the steam is evacuated from the baking chamber by opening the vents.
  This creates a dry, convective heat environment that is necessary to
  drive off surface moisture, allowing the Maillard reaction and
  caramelization to occur. This dry phase is what develops a crisp,
  deeply colored, and flavorful crust.^39^

- **Temperature Adjustments:** It is common practice to bake at a very
  high initial temperature and then reduce the temperature after the
  steam has been vented.^41^ This ensures a powerful oven spring at the
  beginning of the bake, while the lower subsequent temperature allows
  the interior of the loaf (the crumb) to bake through completely
  without burning the exterior crust. Enriched breads like the Whole
  Wheat Sandwich Loaf are baked at a much more moderate, consistent
  temperature (e.g., 350°F or 177°C) and do not require steam.^31^

### 3.2 The Critical Cooling Phase

The baking process does not end when the bread is removed from the oven.
The period immediately following the bake is a critical phase of
stabilization where the loaf\'s final texture is set. Rushing this stage
can ruin an otherwise perfect loaf.

- **The Science of Cooling:** A loaf of bread emerging from the oven has
  an internal temperature near the boiling point of water. Its internal
  structure, composed of gelatinized starches, is extremely delicate and
  saturated with steam. The cooling process allows this internal
  moisture to slowly migrate outwards and evaporate from the crust, and
  it gives the starches in the crumb time to retrograde and set into a
  stable, sliceable sponge-like structure.^60^

- **Consequences of Premature Slicing:** Slicing into a loaf while it is
  still hot is one of the most common mistakes that compromises bread
  quality. The knife tears through the fragile, unset crumb, and the
  trapped steam rushes out. This causes the delicate internal structure
  to collapse, resulting in a gummy, dense, and doughy texture.^60^

- **Proper Cooling Procedure:** To ensure proper cooling, all breads
  must be removed from their baking pans immediately (if applicable) and
  placed on wire cooling racks. These racks allow for unimpeded air
  circulation around the entire surface of the loaf, which is essential
  for even cooling and preventing the bottom crust from becoming
  soggy.^31^ A minimum gap of 3 inches should be maintained between
  cooling loaves to allow adequate airflow.^60^

- **Cooling Times and Target Temperatures:** A loaf is considered fully
  cooled when its internal temperature has dropped to ambient room
  temperature, or at a minimum, below 100°F (38°C).^60^ The time
  required to reach this state is often significantly longer than
  anticipated and varies by bread type and size. Flours with higher
  moisture retention, such as whole wheat and especially rye, require
  substantially longer cooling periods.^60^

### Table 3.1: Minimum Cooling Times Before Packaging/Slicing

  -------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Bread Type**      **Loaf Size**     **Minimum Cooling **Rationale**
                                        Time**            
  ------------------- ----------------- ----------------- -----------------
  Baguette            \~300g            30-60 minutes     Low volume and
                                                          high surface area
                                                          allow for rapid
                                                          heat and moisture
                                                          dissipation.

  Sourdough Loaf      1.5 lb (680g)     3-4 hours         A standard hearth
                                                          loaf with a dense
                                                          crumb that
                                                          requires
                                                          significant time
                                                          for the
                                                          gelatinized
                                                          starches to set.

  Whole Wheat Loaf    1.5 lb (680g)     4+ hours          Whole grains,
                                                          particularly the
                                                          bran and germ,
                                                          retain more
                                                          moisture,
                                                          extending the
                                                          necessary cooling
                                                          and stabilization
                                                          time.^60^

  Ciabatta/Focaccia   N/A               1-2 hours         High surface area
                                                          aids cooling, but
                                                          the extremely
                                                          high internal
                                                          moisture content
                                                          requires adequate
                                                          time to set.

  Rye Breads (\>25%)  1.5 lb (680g)     6-8+ hours        Rye flour is rich
                                                          in pentosans,
                                                          which bind and
                                                          retain large
                                                          amounts of water,
                                                          necessitating a
                                                          very long cooling
                                                          period to avoid
                                                          gumminess.^60^
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------

The physical space required for cooling represents a critical, and
frequently underestimated, production bottleneck. While bakers
meticulously plan for oven capacity, they often neglect to allocate
sufficient space for the cooling phase. The multi-hour cooling times
mandated for quality mean that a large inventory of finished, but
not-yet-packable, product will occupy significant physical space for a
substantial portion of the production day. A small bakery producing over
60 loaves daily will have dozens of loaves on cooling racks at any given
time.^61^ This can lead to congestion in the high-traffic area around
the ovens, creating workflow inefficiencies and safety hazards.
Packaging and order fulfillment tasks are necessarily delayed for hours
after the bake is complete. Therefore, a bakery\'s operational plan must
account for ample \"in-process\" cooling space. This translates directly
to capital investment in a sufficient number of mobile sheet pan racks
and a facility layout that strategically separates the hot production
zone from the cooling and packaging areas to maintain an organized,
efficient, and safe workflow.^62^

## Section 4: Designing the Daily Production Workflow

This final section synthesizes the technical formulas and procedures
into a coherent, actionable operational plan. It addresses the central
challenge faced by a small artisan bakery: how to efficiently produce a
variety of breads, each with its own unique and often lengthy timeline,
using limited staff, equipment, and space. The key lies in strategic
scheduling, leveraging the science of fermentation to create a
manageable and predictable workflow.

### 4.1 Principles of Efficient Bakery Scheduling

A successful bakery does not produce each item from start to finish
within a single day. Instead, it operates on a continuous, overlapping
cycle, orchestrating multiple doughs at different stages of production
simultaneously. This complex dance is made possible by adhering to
several core scheduling principles.

- **The Power of Cold Fermentation (Retarding):** The single most
  important strategic tool for a small bakery is the extensive use of
  cold fermentation, or retardation.^36^ By placing dough---either after
  shaping (as with sourdough) or during bulk fermentation (as with
  focaccia)---into a temperature-controlled environment like a
  refrigerator or walk-in cooler, the baker achieves two critical
  operational goals. First, the slow, cold fermentation develops a more
  complex and nuanced flavor profile in the bread.^36^ Second, and more
  importantly from a logistical standpoint, it **decouples the mixing
  and shaping schedule from the baking schedule**. Dough can be prepared
  on Day 1, held in a stable state overnight, and then baked on Day 2 or
  even Day 3.^34^ This provides immense flexibility. It allows the baker
  to have loaves ready to bake first thing in the morning without having
  to start the mixing process in the middle of the night. The
  refrigerator is not merely a storage unit; it is an active production
  tool that bridges one day\'s work to the next.

- **Staggering Production:** To manage the demands on equipment
  (especially the mixer) and bench space, the workflow must be
  staggered. All doughs are not mixed at the same time. The process
  begins the day before with the preparation of preferments like poolish
  and biga.^61^ On the production day, the main dough mixes are
  staggered throughout the morning and afternoon. This ensures that the
  mixer is available when needed and that there is always adequate bench
  space for the critical tasks of folding, dividing, and shaping.

- **Baking by Temperature:** The daily bake schedule is most efficiently
  organized by oven temperature. The day begins with the oven preheated
  to its highest temperature for the hearth breads that require intense
  heat and steam (Baguettes, Ciabatta, Sourdough). Once these are baked,
  the oven temperature can be lowered to the more moderate levels
  required for enriched breads like the Whole Wheat Sandwich Loaf, which
  are baked without steam.^31^ This approach minimizes the time spent
  waiting for the oven to heat up or cool down between different product
  runs, maximizing the use of this critical piece of equipment.

### 4.2 A Sample Production Day: The Overlapping 2-Day Cycle

A small artisan bakery does not operate on a linear, \"start-to-finish\"
daily schedule. Its workflow is a continuous, overlapping cycle where
the primary activities of one day (mixing and shaping) are in
preparation for the next day\'s products, while the first activity of
the day (baking) is the culmination of the previous day\'s labor. This
two-day cycle, bridged by the strategic use of cold retardation, is the
fundamental paradigm of modern artisan bread production. It is the key
to managing a diverse product line with a small staff while maintaining
high standards of quality. The following table provides a tangible,
hour-by-hour blueprint that integrates the production of all five bread
types into a single, manageable workflow for a small team, illustrating
the principles of staggering, retardation, and baking by temperature.

### Table 4.1: Sample Daily Production Schedule for a Small Artisan Bakery

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Time**          **Task**          **Product(s)**    **Staff & Notes**
  ----------------- ----------------- ----------------- -----------------
  **DAY 1 -                                             
  PREPARATION &                                         
  SHAPING**                                             

  8:00 AM           Feed Sourdough    Sourdough         **Baker 1:**
                    Starter for                         Prepare the
                    Levain                              levain for
                                                        tomorrow\'s
                                                        sourdough mix.

  9:00 AM           Mix Poolish &     Baguette,         **Baker 2:** Mix
                    Biga              Ciabatta          preferments for
                                                        tomorrow. Place
                                                        in designated
                                                        containers for
                                                        their long, slow
                                                        ferment.

  10:00 AM          **Mix Sourdough   Sourdough         **Baker 1:** Use
                    Dough**                             yesterday\'s
                                                        levain. Begin
                                                        bulk fermentation
                                                        (BF) in a large
                                                        tub.

  11:00 AM          **Mix Whole Wheat Whole Wheat       **Baker 2:**
                    Dough**                             Begin BF in mixer
                                                        bowl or tub.

  12:00 PM          **Mix Focaccia    Focaccia          **Baker 1:**
                    Dough**                             Begin short BF.
                                                        After folds,
                                                        transfer to oiled
                                                        pan and move to
                                                        retarder for
                                                        tomorrow\'s bake.

  1:00 PM           Shape Whole Wheat Whole Wheat       **Baker 2:**
                    Loaves                              After BF is
                                                        complete, shape
                                                        loaves and place
                                                        in pans for final
                                                        proof at ambient
                                                        temperature.

  2:00 PM           **Mix Baguette    Baguette          **Baker 1:** Use
                    Dough**                             yesterday\'s
                                                        poolish. Begin
                                                        BF.

  3:00 PM           Shape Sourdough   Sourdough         **Baker 2:**
                    Loaves                              After BF is
                                                        complete, divide,
                                                        preshape, and
                                                        final shape
                                                        loaves. Place in
                                                        bannetons and
                                                        move to retarder.

  4:00 PM           **Mix Ciabatta    Ciabatta          **Baker 1:** Use
                    Dough**                             yesterday\'s
                                                        biga. Begin BF in
                                                        an oiled tub.

  5:00 PM           Divide & Preshape Baguette          **Baker 2:**
                    Baguettes                           After BF is
                                                        complete, divide
                                                        and preshape.
                                                        Allow for a
                                                        20-minute bench
                                                        rest.

  5:30 PM           Final Shape       Baguette          **Baker 2:**
                    Baguettes                           Perform final
                                                        shaping and place
                                                        on a couche for a
                                                        short final proof
                                                        before baking.

  6:00 PM           Divide Ciabatta   Ciabatta          **Baker 1:**
                    Dough                               After BF is
                                                        complete, gently
                                                        divide dough on a
                                                        well-floured
                                                        surface. Transfer
                                                        to a couche and
                                                        move to retarder.

  6:30 PM           End of Day        All               **Team:**
                    Cleanup / Prep                      Thoroughly clean
                                                        all equipment and
                                                        surfaces. Prepare
                                                        and scale dry
                                                        ingredients for
                                                        the next
                                                        morning\'s mixes.

  **DAY 2 - BAKING                                      
  & REPEAT CYCLE**                                      

  4:00 AM           Ovens On          All               **Baker 1
                                                        (Opener):**
                                                        Arrive and
                                                        preheat deck
                                                        ovens to 500°F
                                                        (260°C).

  5:00 AM           **BAKE:           Baguette          **Baker 1:** Load
                    Baguettes**                         baguettes. Inject
                                                        steam. Bake hot
                                                        and fast. These
                                                        are baked
                                                        same-day.

  5:45 AM           **BAKE: Sourdough Sourdough,        **Baker 2
                    & Ciabatta**      Ciabatta          (Arrives):** Load
                                                        loaves directly
                                                        from the
                                                        retarder. Inject
                                                        steam. Bake at
                                                        high heat.

  6:45 AM           Lower Oven Temp   Whole Wheat       **Baker 1:**
                                                        Begin lowering
                                                        and venting oven
                                                        temperature to
                                                        350°F (177°C).

  7:00 AM           **BAKE: Whole     Whole Wheat,      **Baker 1 & 2:**
                    Wheat &           Focaccia          Load the proofed
                    Focaccia**                          whole wheat
                                                        loaves and the
                                                        retarded
                                                        focaccia. Bake
                                                        without steam.

  8:00 AM           **Begin Day 2     All               **Baker 1 & 2:**
                    Mixing Cycle**                      Repeat the Day 1
                                                        schedule,
                                                        starting with
                                                        feeding the
                                                        starter for Day
                                                        3\'s bread.

  9:00 AM           Cooling &         Baked Goods       **Baker 3
                    Packaging                           (Arrives):**
                                                        Manage the
                                                        cooling rack
                                                        inventory. Begin
                                                        packaging cooled
                                                        baguettes.
                                                        Prepare the
                                                        retail space for
                                                        opening.

  12:00 PM          Mid-day Cleanup & All               **Team:** Clean
                    Stocking                            mixing area after
                                                        morning
                                                        production.
                                                        Restock retail
                                                        shelves. Manage
                                                        customer service.

  4:00 PM           Final Shaping &   Sourdough,        **Team:** Finish
                    Retarding         Ciabatta          shaping the last
                                                        doughs of the
                                                        day. Place them
                                                        in the retarder
                                                        for Day 3\'s
                                                        bake. Final
                                                        cleanup and
                                                        closing
                                                        procedures.
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

This schedule is a template and must be adapted to the specific output,
staffing, and equipment of the bakery. It demonstrates the principles of
overlapping production cycles that are essential for success.^61^

## Conclusion

The successful operation of a small-scale artisan bakery is a complex
synthesis of art, science, and logistics. It requires moving beyond
individual recipes to a system-based approach grounded in the principles
of commercial production. The adoption of baker\'s percentages as a
universal language provides the foundation for consistency and
scalability. A deep understanding of how hydration levels dictate dough
handling, fermentation behavior, and equipment utilization allows for
the efficient production of a diverse product line, from stiff,
low-hydration sandwich loaves to slack, high-hydration ciabattas.

The mastery of each stage of dough development---from the strategic use
of an autolyse to the precise control of dough temperature and the
patient observation of bulk fermentation---is what separates consistent
quality from unpredictable results. Finally, the implementation of a
staggered, overlapping two-day production schedule, made possible by the
strategic use of cold retardation, is the key to managing the immense
logistical challenge of producing multiple bread types with different
timelines. This operational framework allows a small team to decouple
the labor-intensive processes of mixing and shaping from the
time-critical process of baking, creating a workflow that is both
manageable and capable of producing exceptionally high-quality artisan
bread. By integrating these foundational principles, detailed standard
operating procedures, and strategic scheduling, a small bakery can
establish a robust and efficient production system poised for
sustainable growth and success.

#### Works cited

1.  Baker\'s Percentage \| King Arthur Baking, accessed October 18,
    2025,
    [[https://www.kingarthurbaking.com/pro/reference/bakers-percentage]{.underline}](https://www.kingarthurbaking.com/pro/reference/bakers-percentage)

2.  Understanding Baker\'s Math & Baker\'s Percentages in Sourdough
    Bread Baking, accessed October 18, 2025,
    [[https://www.pantrymama.com/understanding-bakers-math/]{.underline}](https://www.pantrymama.com/understanding-bakers-math/)

3.  Baker\'s Math 101: How to do Baker\'s Math - Bread & Basil, accessed
    October 18, 2025,
    [[https://www.breadandbasil.nyc/sourdough/bakers-math]{.underline}](https://www.breadandbasil.nyc/sourdough/bakers-math)

4.  can someone explain bakers percent to me like i\'m 7? : r/Baking -
    Reddit, accessed October 18, 2025,
    [[https://www.reddit.com/r/Baking/comments/z2airu/can_someone_explain_bakers_percent_to_me_like_im_7/]{.underline}](https://www.reddit.com/r/Baking/comments/z2airu/can_someone_explain_bakers_percent_to_me_like_im_7/)

5.  The Baker\'s Percentage - Caputo Flour, accessed October 18, 2025,
    [[https://caputoflour.com/blogs/learn/the-baker-s-percentage]{.underline}](https://caputoflour.com/blogs/learn/the-baker-s-percentage)

6.  caputoflour.com, accessed October 18, 2025,
    [[https://caputoflour.com/blogs/learn/the-baker-s-percentage#:\~:text=A%20Baker\'s%20Percentage%20isn\'t,is%20always%20greater%20than%20100%25.]{.underline}](https://caputoflour.com/blogs/learn/the-baker-s-percentage#:~:text=A%20Baker's%20Percentage%20isn't,is%20always%20greater%20than%20100%25.)

7.  Sourdough Bread Formula, accessed October 18, 2025,
    [[https://bread-magazine.com/sourdough-bread-recipe/]{.underline}](https://bread-magazine.com/sourdough-bread-recipe/)

8.  Hydration in bread dough, explained - King Arthur Baking, accessed
    October 18, 2025,
    [[https://www.kingarthurbaking.com/blog/2023/01/11/bread-hydration]{.underline}](https://www.kingarthurbaking.com/blog/2023/01/11/bread-hydration)

9.  The Science of Hydration: How does Dough Hydration Levels Impact
    Bread Quality?, accessed October 18, 2025,
    [[https://www.swissbake.in/blog/master-dough-hydration]{.underline}](https://www.swissbake.in/blog/master-dough-hydration)

10. All About Hydration - Caputo Flour, accessed October 18, 2025,
    [[https://caputoflour.com/blogs/learn/all-about-hydration]{.underline}](https://caputoflour.com/blogs/learn/all-about-hydration)

11. Same recipe, proofing time, etc. - Low hydration (65%) vs. high
    hydration (80%) : r/Sourdough - Reddit, accessed October 18, 2025,
    [[https://www.reddit.com/r/Sourdough/comments/s0900c/same_recipe_proofing_time_etc_low_hydration_65_vs/]{.underline}](https://www.reddit.com/r/Sourdough/comments/s0900c/same_recipe_proofing_time_etc_low_hydration_65_vs/)

12. Mastering High Hydration Doughs: A Guide for Professional Bakers -
    SwissBake, accessed October 18, 2025,
    [[https://www.swissbake.in/blog/mastering-high-hydration-doughs]{.underline}](https://www.swissbake.in/blog/mastering-high-hydration-doughs)

13. Tips on handling high hydration dough - Weekend Bakery, accessed
    October 18, 2025,
    [[https://www.weekendbakery.com/posts/tips-on-handling-high-hydration-dough/]{.underline}](https://www.weekendbakery.com/posts/tips-on-handling-high-hydration-dough/)

14. Mastering High Hydration Doughs: A Guide for Professional Bakers,
    accessed October 18, 2025,
    [[https://swissbake.bh/blog/mastering-high-hydration-doughs]{.underline}](https://swissbake.bh/blog/mastering-high-hydration-doughs)

15. Tips & Tricks: How to Handle High-Hydration Doughs \| ChefSteps,
    accessed October 18, 2025,
    [[https://www.chefsteps.com/activities/how-to-handle-high-hydration-doughs]{.underline}](https://www.chefsteps.com/activities/how-to-handle-high-hydration-doughs)

16. The ultimate guide to dough mixers in your bakery: efficiency type
    and maintenance, accessed October 18, 2025,
    [[https://www.twothousand.com/the-ultimate-guide-to-dough-mixers-in-your-bakery-efficiency-type-and-maintenance/]{.underline}](https://www.twothousand.com/the-ultimate-guide-to-dough-mixers-in-your-bakery-efficiency-type-and-maintenance/)

17. The Complete Guide to Commercial Dough Mixer - Yida Catering
    Equipment, accessed October 18, 2025,
    [[https://yidacateringequipment.com/complete-guide-commercial-dough-mixer/]{.underline}](https://yidacateringequipment.com/complete-guide-commercial-dough-mixer/)

18. Using the autolyse method \| King Arthur Baking, accessed October
    18, 2025,
    [[https://www.kingarthurbaking.com/blog/2017/09/29/autolyse-sourdough]{.underline}](https://www.kingarthurbaking.com/blog/2017/09/29/autolyse-sourdough)

19. The Ultimate Guide to Autolyse Bread Dough \| The Perfect Loaf,
    accessed October 18, 2025,
    [[https://www.theperfectloaf.com/guides/how-to-autolyse/]{.underline}](https://www.theperfectloaf.com/guides/how-to-autolyse/)

20. 100% Whole Wheat Sandwich Bread Recipe - Serious Eats, accessed
    October 18, 2025,
    [[https://www.seriouseats.com/100-whole-wheat-sandwich-bread]{.underline}](https://www.seriouseats.com/100-whole-wheat-sandwich-bread)

21. FAQ - Autolyse / Fermentolyse - The Sourdough Journey, accessed
    October 18, 2025,
    [[https://thesourdoughjourney.com/faq-autolyse-fermentolyse/]{.underline}](https://thesourdoughjourney.com/faq-autolyse-fermentolyse/)

22. Artisan sourdough bread tips, part 2 \| King Arthur Baking, accessed
    October 18, 2025,
    [[https://www.kingarthurbaking.com/blog/2015/10/14/artisan-sourdough-bread-tips-part-2]{.underline}](https://www.kingarthurbaking.com/blog/2015/10/14/artisan-sourdough-bread-tips-part-2)

23. Beginner\'s Sourdough Bread (With Video) \| The Perfect Loaf,
    accessed October 18, 2025,
    [[https://www.theperfectloaf.com/beginners-sourdough-bread/]{.underline}](https://www.theperfectloaf.com/beginners-sourdough-bread/)

24. Sourdough Ciabatta Bread Recipe - The Perfect Loaf, accessed October
    18, 2025,
    [[https://www.theperfectloaf.com/ciabatta-bread-recipe/]{.underline}](https://www.theperfectloaf.com/ciabatta-bread-recipe/)

25. How Do You Know When Bulk Fermentation Has Finished? - The Pantry
    Mama, accessed October 18, 2025,
    [[https://www.pantrymama.com/bulk-fermentation-finished/]{.underline}](https://www.pantrymama.com/bulk-fermentation-finished/)

26. Homemade Sourdough Bread: Times and Temperatures - ThermoWorks Blog,
    accessed October 18, 2025,
    [[https://blog.thermoworks.com/sourdough-bread-times-and-temperatures/]{.underline}](https://blog.thermoworks.com/sourdough-bread-times-and-temperatures/)

27. How Adjusting Bulk Fermentation Time Affects Sourdough Baking -
    Culinary Exploration, accessed October 18, 2025,
    [[https://www.culinaryexploration.eu/blog/bulk-ferment-test]{.underline}](https://www.culinaryexploration.eu/blog/bulk-ferment-test)

28. The Ultimate Guide to Shaping Bread Dough \| The Perfect Loaf,
    accessed October 18, 2025,
    [[https://www.theperfectloaf.com/guides/shaping-bread-dough/]{.underline}](https://www.theperfectloaf.com/guides/shaping-bread-dough/)

29. How to shape baguettes \| King Arthur Baking, accessed October 18,
    2025,
    [[https://www.kingarthurbaking.com/blog/2023/08/07/how-to-shape-baguettes]{.underline}](https://www.kingarthurbaking.com/blog/2023/08/07/how-to-shape-baguettes)

30. Baguette \| Baking Processes - BAKERpedia, accessed October 18,
    2025,
    [[https://bakerpedia.com/processes/baguette/]{.underline}](https://bakerpedia.com/processes/baguette/)

31. Soft Whole Wheat Bread Recipe, accessed October 18, 2025,
    [[https://breaddad.com/soft-whole-wheat-bread-recipe/]{.underline}](https://breaddad.com/soft-whole-wheat-bread-recipe/)

32. Paul Hollywood\'s Ciabatta with Folds and Baker\'s Percentages -
    Baking With Colette, accessed October 18, 2025,
    [[http://www.bakingwithcolette.com/baking/2016/5/9/paul-hollywoods-ciabatta-with-folds-and-bakers-percentages]{.underline}](http://www.bakingwithcolette.com/baking/2016/5/9/paul-hollywoods-ciabatta-with-folds-and-bakers-percentages)

33. How To Make Incredible Focaccia Bread - The Flavor Bender, accessed
    October 18, 2025,
    [[https://www.theflavorbender.com/how-to-make-focaccia-bread/]{.underline}](https://www.theflavorbender.com/how-to-make-focaccia-bread/)

34. Post your ferment/proofing times\... : r/Sourdough - Reddit,
    accessed October 18, 2025,
    [[https://www.reddit.com/r/Sourdough/comments/8dwai5/post_your_fermentproofing_times/]{.underline}](https://www.reddit.com/r/Sourdough/comments/8dwai5/post_your_fermentproofing_times/)

35. How To Shape a Boule (Round) \| The Perfect Loaf, accessed October
    18, 2025,
    [[https://www.theperfectloaf.com/guides/shaping-a-boule/]{.underline}](https://www.theperfectloaf.com/guides/shaping-a-boule/)

36. Retarding Dough - Scott\'s Breads - Weebly, accessed October 18,
    2025,
    [[http://scottsbreads.weebly.com/retarding-dough.html]{.underline}](http://scottsbreads.weebly.com/retarding-dough.html)

37. Should your dough be covered or uncovered during a cold proof? -
    Culinary Exploration, accessed October 18, 2025,
    [[https://www.culinaryexploration.eu/blog/covered-uncovered-cold-proof]{.underline}](https://www.culinaryexploration.eu/blog/covered-uncovered-cold-proof)

38. Baguette - Baking with the French Tarte, accessed October 18, 2025,
    [[https://www.frenchtarte.com/news-blog/2020/4/30/baguette]{.underline}](https://www.frenchtarte.com/news-blog/2020/4/30/baguette)

39. How to Make the Best Authentic French Baguettes at Home - Culinary
    Exploration, accessed October 18, 2025,
    [[https://www.culinaryexploration.eu/blog/Authentic-French-Baguettes]{.underline}](https://www.culinaryexploration.eu/blog/Authentic-French-Baguettes)

40. Recipe for 80% hydration baguette -- Weekend Bakery, accessed
    October 18, 2025,
    [[https://www.weekendbakery.com/posts/recipe-for-80-hydration-baguette/]{.underline}](https://www.weekendbakery.com/posts/recipe-for-80-hydration-baguette/)

41. How to Make French Baguettes - Taste of Artisan, accessed October
    18, 2025,
    [[https://tasteofartisan.com/french-baguette-recipe/]{.underline}](https://tasteofartisan.com/french-baguette-recipe/)

42. How to Shape Baguettes \| The Perfect Loaf, accessed October 18,
    2025,
    [[https://www.theperfectloaf.com/guides/shaping-baguettes/]{.underline}](https://www.theperfectloaf.com/guides/shaping-baguettes/)

43. Whole Wheat Sourdough Sandwich Bread - The Pantry Mama, accessed
    October 18, 2025,
    [[https://www.pantrymama.com/whole-wheat-sourdough-sandwich-bread/]{.underline}](https://www.pantrymama.com/whole-wheat-sourdough-sandwich-bread/)

44. Ciabatta Bread Recipe｜90%hydration｜10%olive oil - YouTube,
    accessed October 18, 2025,
    [[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aYN0xRwQbq8]{.underline}](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aYN0xRwQbq8)

45. How to Make Fresh Homemade Ciabatta Bread - Alexandra\'s Kitchen,
    accessed October 18, 2025,
    [[https://alexandracooks.com/2021/06/26/how-to-make-ciabatta-bread/]{.underline}](https://alexandracooks.com/2021/06/26/how-to-make-ciabatta-bread/)

46. Ciabatta --- Bake with Jack, accessed October 18, 2025,
    [[https://www.bakewithjack.co.uk/blog-1/ciabattarecipe]{.underline}](https://www.bakewithjack.co.uk/blog-1/ciabattarecipe)

47. Ciabatta - Natasha\'s Baking, accessed October 18, 2025,
    [[https://natashasbaking.com/ciabatta/]{.underline}](https://natashasbaking.com/ciabatta/)

48. Easy Ciabatta Bread Recipe \| Crispy Crust & Airy Homemade
    Ciabatta - Baking Steel, accessed October 18, 2025,
    [[https://bakingsteel.com/blogs/recipes/the-easy-way-to-make-kick-ass-ciabatta-bread]{.underline}](https://bakingsteel.com/blogs/recipes/the-easy-way-to-make-kick-ass-ciabatta-bread)

49. How to make Foolproof Ciabatta Bread - Cloudy Kitchen, accessed
    October 18, 2025,
    [[https://cloudykitchen.com/blog/how-to-make-ciabatta-bread/]{.underline}](https://cloudykitchen.com/blog/how-to-make-ciabatta-bread/)

50. Basic focaccia recipe - desiquintans.com, accessed October 18, 2025,
    [[https://www.desiquintans.com/focaccia]{.underline}](https://www.desiquintans.com/focaccia)

51. The Ultimate Homemade Focaccia - Bread By Elise, accessed October
    18, 2025,
    [[https://breadbyelise.com/homemade-focaccia/]{.underline}](https://breadbyelise.com/homemade-focaccia/)

52. How to Make Focaccia Bread I Baker Bettie, accessed October 18,
    2025,
    [[https://bakerbettie.com/how-to-make-focaccia-bread/]{.underline}](https://bakerbettie.com/how-to-make-focaccia-bread/)

53. A Simple Sourdough Focaccia \| The Perfect Loaf, accessed October
    18, 2025,
    [[https://www.theperfectloaf.com/a-simple-focaccia/]{.underline}](https://www.theperfectloaf.com/a-simple-focaccia/)

54. The Best, Easiest Focaccia Bread Recipe - Alexandra\'s Kitchen,
    accessed October 18, 2025,
    [[https://alexandracooks.com/2018/03/02/overnight-refrigerator-focaccia-best-focaccia/]{.underline}](https://alexandracooks.com/2018/03/02/overnight-refrigerator-focaccia-best-focaccia/)

55. Focaccia -- rosehill sourdough, accessed October 18, 2025,
    [[https://rosehillsourdough.com/recipes/focaccia/]{.underline}](https://rosehillsourdough.com/recipes/focaccia/)

56. Professional bakers who use deck ovens, what is your baking temp,
    steaming process, vent opening time, total bake times? :
    r/Sourdough - Reddit, accessed October 18, 2025,
    [[https://www.reddit.com/r/Sourdough/comments/1cmcx7l/professional_bakers_who_use_deck_ovens_what_is/]{.underline}](https://www.reddit.com/r/Sourdough/comments/1cmcx7l/professional_bakers_who_use_deck_ovens_what_is/)

57. Steaming Sourdough in Commercial Convection Oven : r/AskBaking -
    Reddit, accessed October 18, 2025,
    [[https://www.reddit.com/r/AskBaking/comments/ln0p1k/steaming_sourdough_in_commercial_convection_oven/]{.underline}](https://www.reddit.com/r/AskBaking/comments/ln0p1k/steaming_sourdough_in_commercial_convection_oven/)

58. 24-Hour Baguette Recipe \| Crispy, Chewy, Bakery-Style Bread at Home
    -- Baking Steel ®, accessed October 18, 2025,
    [[https://bakingsteel.com/blogs/recipes/the-24-hour-baguette-recipe]{.underline}](https://bakingsteel.com/blogs/recipes/the-24-hour-baguette-recipe)

59. How to make sourdough bread, accessed October 18, 2025,
    [[https://sourdoughexplained.com/how-to-make-sourdough-bread/]{.underline}](https://sourdoughexplained.com/how-to-make-sourdough-bread/)

60. Cooling Sourdough Bread - Best Tips To Prevent A Gummy Loaf! -
    Busby\'s Bakery School, accessed October 18, 2025,
    [[https://www.busbysbakery.com/cooling-sourdough-bread/]{.underline}](https://www.busbysbakery.com/cooling-sourdough-bread/)

61. Retail Bakery, Baking Schedule - Sourdough - Reddit, accessed
    October 18, 2025,
    [[https://www.reddit.com/r/Sourdough/comments/1afe6rg/retail_bakery_baking_schedule/]{.underline}](https://www.reddit.com/r/Sourdough/comments/1afe6rg/retail_bakery_baking_schedule/)

62. Your Guide to Essential Commercial Bakery Equipment - The Restaurant
    Warehouse, accessed October 18, 2025,
    [[https://therestaurantwarehouse.com/blogs/restaurant-equipment/commercial-bakery-equipment-guide]{.underline}](https://therestaurantwarehouse.com/blogs/restaurant-equipment/commercial-bakery-equipment-guide)

63. Do they commercially use any tools for making bread proof faster? :
    r/AskCulinary - Reddit, accessed October 18, 2025,
    [[https://www.reddit.com/r/AskCulinary/comments/16j8nmo/do_they_commercially_use_any_tools_for_making/]{.underline}](https://www.reddit.com/r/AskCulinary/comments/16j8nmo/do_they_commercially_use_any_tools_for_making/)

64. Retail Bakery, Sourdough Baking Schedule : r/Breadit - Reddit,
    accessed October 18, 2025,
    [[https://www.reddit.com/r/Breadit/comments/1afe8su/retail_bakery_sourdough_baking_schedule/]{.underline}](https://www.reddit.com/r/Breadit/comments/1afe8su/retail_bakery_sourdough_baking_schedule/)
